Boredom has got the best of me, so I decided to try something out. I
was thinking about penalties in football and how we don't have a way
of separating meaningful penalties from the meaningless (i.e. pass
interference from false start). Therefore, I decided to create a
little rudimentary metric that attempts to do just that. I call it
Drive Prolonging Penalties (DPPs). In its current form it only is
meant for defensive penalties as those can oftentimes decide games.
With the DPP's criteria I created lots of other metrics with
ludicrously long acronyms such as:

PADtDPPs (Points Against Due to Drive Prolonging Penalties),

PADtDPPs/TPA (Points Against Due to Drive Prolonging Penalties divided
by Total Points Against),

DPPP (Drive Prolonging Penalties Percentage),

PADtDPPs/TDPPs (Points Against Due to Drive Prolonging Penalties
divided by Total Drive Prolonging Penalties),

etc.

To begin, let me define a DPP. In its current form, a DPP is any
penalty that: gives a team an automatic first down, totals more than
15 yards, puts a team in the redzone (RZ), and puts a team in NRZFGR
(Non-Redzone Field Goal Range (the opponent's 38-21 yard line)). While
it is quite broad, it takes away all offensive penalties and many
minor infractions on the defensive side. From there, I built it up and
put it to some use. I began by creating DPPP (Drive Prolonging
Penalties Percentage) which is calculated by dividing the number of
DPPs with the number of total penalties. Then I created PADtDPPs
(acronym expanded earlier). This is calculated by looking at whether
the drive in which a DPP occurred resulted in a score (TD or FG,
safeties don't count) and adding up what amount of points were gained.
By dividing that number with the number of DPPs, you can get the
average amount of points a team, effectively, gave up each time they
committed a DPP. This statistic is known as PADtDPPs/TDPPs. From there
I went further and looked at what percent of the opponent's points
could be traced back to a DPP, and created PADtDPPs/TPA. This is
calculated by taking the PADtDPPs and dividing it by the total points
scored by the opponent.

Now all of this looked great on paper, but I hadn't really applied it.
So I did just that. I decided to use these metrics to analyze the
entire 2012 regular season for the New England Patriots. I spent about
3-4 hours gathering the necessary data. I took out my old math
notebook and recorded the data the old fashioned way, by hand. For
each week of play, I recorded the match-up, result (W or L), score,
total penalties, total DPPs, documented exactly what the DPP was (type
of foul, amount of yards, the down and distance before and after, and
the result at the end of the drive), and the rest of the metrics I
created. I got the info using ESPN's Box Score and Play-By-Play
transcripts.

After recording the data for all 16 weeks, I started to try to make
sense of the data. Here is some of what I found:

Entire Season:

The Patriots committed 97 penalties which came out to about 6.06
penalties/game. They committed 31 DPPs (1.94 /game). The ratio of DPPs
to penalties came out to about 1 DPP for every 3 total penalties
(31.96%).

At the end of the season, the Patriots had surrendered 331 points to
opponents (roughly 20.69 per game). As far as PADtDPPs, they
surrendered 109 (coming out to 6.81 points or roughly one touchdown
per game). Their PADtDPPs/TPA was 32.93%. I also went ahead and added
up the PADtDPPs/TPA from each game and averaged those as well. That
told me that for every game played, roughly 29.06% of the points
against were due to DPPs.

While I was proud that my metric actually worked and made some sense,
I went deeper. If you remember, the Pats went 3-3 during the first 6
games (they lost to the Cardinals, Ravens, and Seahawks). I decided to
analyze that specific time frame and see what I could find.

Weeks 1-6:

In the first 6 weeks of the season. the Patriots surrendered 34
penalties (roughly a third of their season total about a third of the
way into the season). This was nothing fascinating. The average
penalties per game came out to 5.66 which was 0.40 less than that of
the season average. The number of DPPs (11) and average per game
(1.83) also seemed pretty much the norm. However, it got interesting a
little bit later. In these 6 weeks the Pats surrendered 137 points
(40% of the season total). This meant that they were allowing 22.83
points/game which is 2.14 points more than the season average. Moving
on to PADtDPPs, they surrendered 51 points (8.5 points per game or one
TD and 1/2 of a FG). The total PADtDPPs/TPA was 37.22% (almost 5% more
than the season) and the average PADtDPPs/TPA was 36.66% (7.6% over
the season average).

While this did show that there was an increase in penalties
(specifically DPPs), it wasn't quite as definitive as I was expecting.
I looked back at my original data and saw that, mixed in with the
losses were games in which there were few DPPs. Thus throwing off my
final statistics. I decided to narrow my criteria and only analyzed
the three losses, and what I found was a big difference that proved
that DPPs were a factor in their losses. Here is that info:

First 3 Losses:

In these three weeks, the Patriots committed 24 penalties! This comes
out to 8 penalties a game (nearly 2.5 penalties more than the 6 week
average and 2 more than the season average). They committed 8 DPPs
(2.66 per game, almost 1 DPP more than the total 6 weeks). The DPPP
was 33% (this was one stat that didn't change). The Pats allowed 75
points against (25 per game, which was up by 2 points from the 6 week
average). It is here where we see the true effect of the DPP. The 6
week average of PADtDPPs was 51 points, 38 of those came in their
three losses. The average PADtDPPs was 12.66 (4.16 above the 6 week
average and twice as much as the season average). In fact, the total
PADtDPPs/TPA was 50.66%. The average PADtDPPs/TPA was 47%. This tells
us that nearly 50% of the opponent's points were due to DPPs.

As you can see, taking away the 3 wins helped with showing the effect
of DPPs on their games. In fact, one game in particular showed this
and that was Week 3 against the Ravens (Loss 31-30).

Stats from Week 3:

Total Penalties: 10

DPPs: 5 (3 Defensive Holding, 2 Pass Interference)

DPPP: 50%

PADtDPPs: 24

Points Given up per DPP: 4.8

PADtDPPs/TPA: 0.77 (I expressed them as decimals in my notebook)

This shows that only one TD was scored without the help of DPPs.

Tell me what you think!
